docs(observability): concepts+ Quickstart and how-tos MTA-2251 (#910)
scaleway/docs-content: observability/cockpit/concepts.mdx

---
meta:
  title: Observability - Concepts
  description: This page explains all the concepts related to Scaleway Observability
content:
  h1: Observability - Concepts
  paragraph: This page explains all the concepts related to Scaleway Observability
tags: advanced settings
categories:
  - observability
---

> Observability allows you to monitor your applications and their infrastructure by giving you insights and context into their behavior. Observability also enables you to visualize your metrics and logs through a Grafana dashboard.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Observability allows you to monitor your applications and their infrastructure behavior. In addition, it enables you to visualize your metrics and logs through a Grafana dashboard.
```

<Concept opened>

## Alerting

> Alerting keeps you aware of issues in your environments, by detecting complex conditions defined by a rule. When a condition defined by a rule is met, the rule tracks it as an alert and responds by triggering one or more actions.

Author: ```suggestion
Alerting detects complex conditions defined by a rule and keeps you aware of issues in your environments. When a condition defined by a rule is met, the rule tracks it as an alert and responds by triggering one or more actions.
```

> Alerting keeps you aware of issues in your environments, by detecting complex conditions defined by a rule. When a condition defined by a rule is met, the rule tracks it as an alert and responds by triggering one or more actions.

Reviewer: je trouve cette definition un peu complex avec beaucoup de voix passive.

</Concept>

<Concept opened>

## Alert manager

Scaleway's alert manager allows you to manage and respond to alerts. It handles alerts sent when the alerting rules we run are firing. The alert manager triggers alerts (e.g. emails or texts) if a criteria you have configured on your applications' metrics and logs is activated.

</Concept>

<Concept>

## Alerting rules

> Alerting rules allow you to define criteria that determine whether an alert will fire. The rule consists of queries and expressions, a condition, the frequency of evaluation, and the duration over which the condition is met. When an alert fires, a notification is sent to the alert manager, which forwards the notification to receivers.

Author: ```suggestion
Alerting rules allow you to define criteria that determine whether an alert is triggered. The rule consists of queries and expressions, a condition, the frequency of evaluation, and the duration over which the condition is met. When an alert is triggered, a notification is sent to the alert manager, which forwards the notification to receivers.
```

> Alerting rules allow you to define criteria that determine whether an alert will fire. The rule consists of queries and expressions, a condition, the frequency of evaluation, and the duration over which the condition is met. When an alert fires, a notification is sent to the alert manager, which forwards the notification to receivers.

Reviewer: fire? trigger? initiate?

</Concept>

<Concept opened>

## Cockpit

> A Cockpit is an Instance of the Observability product that has a dedicated Grafana instance. A Scaleway Project can have only one Cockpit.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A Cockpit is an instance of the Observability product that has a dedicated Grafana instance. A Scaleway Project can have only one Cockpit.
```

Reviewer 2: In this case when we say "an instance" I think we're definitely not referencing the product

</Concept>

<Concept>

## Contact points

> Contact points define how your contacts are notified when an alert fires. They have contact point types such as emails, slack, texts etc. When an alert fires, a notification is sent to all contact point types listed for a contact point.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Contact points define how your contacts are notified when an alert fires. Contact point types include emails, Slack and texts. When an alert fires, a notification is sent to all contact point types listed for a contact point.
```

</Concept>

<Concept>

## Endpoints

An endpoint is the point of entry in a communication channel when two systems are interacting. The endpoint is the means from which the API can access the resources they need from a server to perform their task. An endpoint can include a URL of a server or service.

</Concept>

<Concept>

## Loki Remote Write

> Loki Remote Write is a feature that allows you to send metrics from almost any device to a Loki server.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``Loki Remote Write`` is a feature that allows you to send metrics from almost any device to a Loki server.
```

</Concept>

<Concept>

## LogQL

LogQL is Grafana Loki’s language for querying logs. LogQL uses labels and operators for filtering.

</Concept>

<Concept>

## Logs

Logs provide a record of all events and errors that take place during the lifecycle of your resources. They represent an excellent source of visibility if you want to know when a problem occurred, or which events correlate with it.

</Concept>

<Concept>

## Managed alerts

> Managed alerts are alerts criteria that Scaleway defines for you. They allow you to receive alerts for behaviors that we deem abnormal on your products.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Managed alerts are alert criteria that Scaleway defines for you. They allow you to receive alerts for behaviors that we deem abnormal on your products.
```

</Concept>

<Concept>

## Managed dashboards

A managed dashboard is a set of one or more panels organized into one or more rows where you can visualize your data.

</Concept>

<Concept>

## Metric

A metric is a lifecycle-related numerical representation of data (e.g. disk usage and CPU usage) measured over intervals of time. Metrics give you a bird's eye view of your infrastructure.

</Concept>

<Concept>

> ## Monitoring

Reviewer 3: Not sure this one is a good one, I doubt our visitor would not know what monitoring is about. Plus there are as many definitions as there are sysadmin 😄

> A metric is a lifecycle-related numerical representation of data (e.g.disk usage and CPU usage) measured over intervals of time. Metrics give you a bird's eye view of your infrastructure.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A metric is a lifecycle-related numerical representation of data (e.g. disk usage and CPU usage) measured over intervals of time. Metrics give you a bird's eye view of your infrastructure.
```

Monitoring is a tool that allows you to watch and understand the state of your systems. Monitoring is based on gathering predefined sets of metrics or logs.

</Concept>

<Concept>

## Prometheus Remote Write

> ``Prometheus Remote Write`` is a feature that allows you to send your metrics from almost any device to a Prometheus server.

Reviewer 3: ``Prometheus Remote Write`` is the protocol you should use to push your metrics to your cockpit Metrics endpoint

> Prometheus Remote Write is a feature that allows you to send your metrics from almost any device to a Prometheus server.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``Prometheus Remote Write`` is a feature that allows you to send your metrics from almost any device to a Prometheus server.
```

> Prometheus remote write is a feature that allows you to send your metrics from almost any device to a Prometheus server.

Reviewer 2: I think either this should be in title case, or the name of the concept shouldn't

</Concept>

<Concept>

## PromQL

PromQL, short for Prometheus Querying Language, is the main way to query metrics within Prometheus. It is designed for building queries for graphs and alerts.

</Concept>

<Concept>

## Receivers

> Receivers are hubs consisting of contacts points. You can associate one or several alerts to one or more receivers. This allows you to diversify your alerts.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Receivers are hubs consisting of contacts points. You can associate one or several alerts with one or more receivers. This allows you to diversify your alerts.
```

</Concept>

<Concept>

## Recording rules

Recording rules allow you to precompute frequently needed or computationally expensive expressions and save their results as a new set of time series.

</Concept>

<Concept>

## Samples

A sample is a unique measuring point on a time series.

</Concept>

<Concept>

## Time series

> A time series is a sequence of numerical data points in successive order, that tracks a sample over time.

Reviewer 3: A time series is a sequence of numerical data points in successive order, that tracks an information over time.

(the sample is a point in the time series, as such the time series cannot track it 😄)

Reviewer 3: Agreed "information" is not an excellent term here, couldn't come with a better one

</Concept>

<Concept>

## Tokens

> Tokens are secret keys that allow you to grant other cloud providers’ services and platforms access to your Cockpit. You can generate new tokens and select token permissions such as push and query. Push and query allow you to send and fetch your data (metrics and logs) to and from your Cockpit. You can also choose to configure alerting and recording rules or set up the alert manager via your tokens.

Reviewer 3: Tokens are secret keys that allow you to authenticate against your Cockpit endpoints (Metrics, Logs, Alerts).

You can generate new tokens and select token permissions such as push and query. Push and query allow you to send and fetch your data (metrics and logs) to and from your Cockpit.

You can also choose to configure alerting and recording rules or set up the alert manager using your tokens.
